Day by day traffic is increasing on one of the websites managed by the Nautilus production support team. Therefore, the team has observed a degradation in website performance. Following discussions about this issue, the team has decided to deploy this application on a high availability stack i.e on Nautilus infra in Stratos DC. They started the migration last month and it is almost done, as only the LBR server configuration is pending. Configure LBR server as per the information given below: a. Install nginx on LBR (load balancer) server. b. Configure load-balancing with the an http context making use of all App Servers. Ensure that you update only the main Nginx configuration file located at /etc/nginx/nginx.conf. c. Make sure you do not update the apache port that is already defined in the apache configuration on all app servers, also make sure apache service is up and running on all app servers. d. Once done, you can access the website using StaticApp button on the top bar.

What is the task?

You are required to configure the Load Balancer (LBR) server using Nginx so that incoming web traffic is distributed across multiple application servers (stapp01, stapp02, stapp03).

This involves:

Installing Nginx on the LBR server

Configuring HTTP load balancing

Pointing Nginx to existing Apache services running on app servers

Ensuring no changes are made on Apache ports

Making the website accessible via the StaticApp button

🔹 Why is this required in real enterprises?

As traffic increases:

A single server becomes a bottleneck

Website performance degrades

Downtime risk increases

Load balancing provides:

High Availability (HA) – if one app server fails, others serve traffic

Scalability – traffic is shared

Performance improvement

Fault tolerance

This is a standard production architecture in enterprises.

🔹 Which servers does this apply to?
Server	Role	Why
LBR Server	Load Balancer	Nginx distributes traffic
stapp01–03	App Servers	Run Apache + PHP
Client (Browser)	End User	Accesses via LB

⚠️ Only the LBR server is modified
App servers must remain unchanged.

2️⃣ Prerequisites & Assumptions
🔹 Required Access

root or sudo access on LBR server

SSH access to app servers (for verification only)

🔹 Required Services

Apache already installed & running on:

stapp01

stapp02

stapp03

Apache port (usually 80) must not be changed

🔹 Important Pre-Checks
Check Apache status on app servers
sudo systemctl status httpd


Expected:

Active: active (running)

Check Apache listening port
sudo ss -tulnp | grep httpd


Expected:

LISTEN 0 128 *:80

3️⃣ Exact Commands (Step-by-Step)
🔹 Step 1: Login to LBR Server
ssh root@lbr


Why:
All load balancing is done on the Load Balancer server only.

🔹 Step 2: Install Nginx
Command
sudo yum install -y nginx

Explanation

yum → Enterprise package manager (RHEL/CentOS)

install → Installs the package

-y → Auto-confirms prompts

nginx → Load balancer software

Why this is best

Stable

Lightweight

Industry-standard reverse proxy & load balancer

🔹 Step 3: Edit Main Nginx Configuration File

⚠️ Only edit this file

sudo vi /etc/nginx/nginx.conf

🔹 Step 4: Configure HTTP Load Balancing

Inside http {} block, add:

upstream backend_servers {
    server stapp01:80;
    server stapp02:80;
    server stapp03:80;
}

server {
    listen 80;
    location / {
        proxy_pass http://backend_servers;
    }
}

Line-by-Line Explanation
Line	Purpose
upstream backend_servers	Defines backend pool
server stapp01:80	App server 1
server stapp02:80	App server 2
server stapp03:80	App server 3
listen 80	LB listens on HTTP
proxy_pass	Forwards requests
Why this approach?

Uses default round-robin

No app-server modification

Simple, production-safe

Scales easily

🔹 Step 5: Test Nginx Configuration
sudo nginx -t


Expected:

syntax is ok
test is successful

🔹 Step 6: Start & Enable Nginx
sudo systemctl start nginx
sudo systemctl enable nginx


Why:

start → Activate now

enable → Persist after reboot

4️⃣ Verification & Validation
🔹 Check Nginx Service
sudo systemctl status nginx


Expected:

Active: active (running)

🔹 Check Listening Port
sudo ss -tulnp | grep nginx


Expected:

LISTEN 0 128 *:80

🔹 Functional Validation

Click StaticApp button

Refresh page multiple times

Requests are served via LB

5️⃣ Errors & Troubleshooting
❌ Error: 502 Bad Gateway

Cause: Apache down on app server
Fix:

sudo systemctl start httpd

❌ Error: nginx: configuration file test failed

Cause: Syntax error
Fix:

Recheck braces { }

Ensure config is inside http {}

❌ Website not loading

Cause: Firewall or service down
Fix:

sudo systemctl restart nginx

6️⃣ Security & Best Practices
🔹 Security Considerations

No root exposure to clients

App servers hidden behind LB

Can later add:

SSL/TLS

WAF

Rate limiting

🔹 Why Nginx?

Battle-tested

High performance

Minimal memory footprint

🔹 Alternatives

HAProxy

AWS ALB (cloud)

F5 (enterprise hardware)

7️⃣ Final Task Summary

Installed: Nginx

Configured: HTTP Load Balancer

Servers Used: stapp01, stapp02, stapp03

Modified Server: LBR only

Apache: Unchanged

Result: High availability achieved

✅ Status: Successful

Nginx Load Balancer Task

Prepared by: Ranjith Neerati
Environment: Stratos Datacenter, Nautilus Project

1️⃣ Task Understanding

Task in Simple Words:

You were asked to set up a Nginx Load Balancer (LBR) on the server stlb01.

The load balancer should distribute incoming web traffic to three backend application servers (stapp01, stapp02, stapp03) running Apache on port 3002.

The LBR should not serve any static content itself, only proxy requests to the backend servers.

Why this task exists in real-world enterprise environments:

Applications often receive high traffic; a single server may slow down.

A load balancer improves performance, scalability, and reliability by distributing traffic.

It allows backend servers to be maintained individually without downtime for users.

Ensures security by preventing direct access to backend servers and local files.

Which system/server/component it applies to and why:

Component	Role in this task
stlb01 (LBR)	Nginx server acting as load balancer
stapp01/02/03	Apache web servers serving application content
Port 3002	Application servers’ listening port for HTTP traffic
2️⃣ Technical Terms Explained
Term	Explanation (Beginner-Friendly)	Importance for Task
Nginx	A web server that can also act as a reverse proxy	Handles traffic from users and sends it to backend servers
Load Balancer (LBR)	A server that distributes incoming traffic across multiple servers	Prevents any one server from being overloaded
Apache (httpd)	Web server software running the actual application	Provides content that the LB proxies
Upstream	Nginx directive defining a group of backend servers	Allows Nginx to distribute traffic to multiple servers
Proxy_pass	Nginx directive to forward requests to another server	Enables Nginx to act as a reverse proxy
Root directive	Defines local directory to serve static content	Must be avoided on LB to prevent accidental static serving
Port	Numeric address where a service listens for connections	Backend apps are on 3002; LB listens on 80
Curl	Linux command-line tool to test HTTP requests	Used to verify LB and backend servers are responding
nginx -t	Test Nginx configuration syntax	Prevents syntax errors from crashing Nginx in production
3️⃣ Commands Breakdown
a) Test Nginx Configuration
sudo nginx -t


Explanation:

sudo → run as root, needed because Nginx config is root-owned

nginx → runs the Nginx program

-t → tests the configuration syntax without starting Nginx

Real-world example:

Before restarting Nginx, always run nginx -t to avoid downtime due to syntax errors.

b) Restart Nginx
sudo systemctl restart nginx


Explanation:

systemctl → manages system services in modern Linux systems

restart → stops and starts Nginx, applying new config

nginx service is restarted on LB server

Example:

If you changed the upstream servers, this ensures traffic flows to the updated servers.

c) Check LB response
curl -I http://stlb01


Explanation:

curl → command-line HTTP client

-I → fetch only HTTP headers

http://stlb01 → LB server URL

Expected Output:

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Server: nginx/1.20.1

d) Check backend response
curl -I http://stapp01:3002


Explanation:

Confirms that Apache is running on port 3002

Server header shows Apache/2.4.62

e) Check for accidental local root
sudo nginx -T | grep root


Explanation:

-T → dumps full Nginx config

grep root → searches for root directives

Ensures no LB root is active

4️⃣ Mistakes & Learning
Mistake 1 – LB serving static content

Why: Original config included root /usr/share/nginx/html or default includes.

Detection: Validator failed with “Website not running on LBR URL”.

Correction: Removed all root directives and disabled includes (conf.d/*.conf & default.d/*.conf).

Mistake 2 – Wrong backend port

Why: Initially may have used port 5001 instead of 3002.

Detection: curl to LB showed LB headers but backend not responding correctly.

Correction: Updated upstream servers to use port 3002.

Lesson Learned:

Always confirm backend port and remove static content from LB.

Use curl -I and nginx -T | grep root before submitting.

5️⃣ Verification & Validation

Test Nginx syntax: nginx -t → success means no syntax errors.

Restart Nginx: systemctl restart nginx → applies config safely.

Curl LB: curl -I http://stlb01 → Server: nginx and HTTP 200

Curl backend: curl -I http://stapp01:3002 → Server: Apache/2.4.62

Check root: nginx -T | grep root → nothing active

Why it matters:

Ensures traffic flows through LB to correct backend servers.

Prevents accidental static file exposure.

Success Output: HTTP 200, Server: nginx, backend servers reachable
Failure Output: Static page or validator error “Website not running on LBR URL”

6️⃣ Security & Best Practices

No root directive → prevents LB from serving local files

Restricted includes → prevents accidental config override

Proper upstream configuration → avoids downtime if backend changes

Why safe: Traffic only goes through LB to backend, no direct access to local files.

What could go wrong: Serving local static content or wrong port → security breach or validator failure

Alternative: Use dedicated reverse proxy configs in /etc/nginx/conf.d/lb.conf instead of editing main config.

7️⃣ Final Task Summary
Aspect	Details
What was done	Configured Nginx LBR to proxy traffic to 3 Apache servers on port 3002
Server/System	stlb01 (Nginx), stapp01/02/03 (Apache)
Tools/Commands	Nginx, curl, systemctl
Outcome	Traffic successfully proxied; validator passed
Status	✅ Successful
